---
layout: post
title:  "Lua for Object-Oriented Game Development"
date:   2019-06-13 22:29:46 -0700
categories: lua game-development
---

My first reaction to Lua was that it was a language that ingeniously accomplished a lot with very little. Tables are the data structures that fulfill all use-cases. They are hash tables as well as objects as well as re-sizable arrays. There are 3rd party libraries that allow tables to be used as classes.

My use-case for Lua was game development with Love2d. Python was more featureful, but PyGame didn’t inspire me and the Python interpreter couldn’t perform like LuaJIT.

As my projects grew in size, I realized that I didn’t have a feel for how code in Lua should be structured. There was no Lua equivalent of “Pythonic”, and Lua didn’t incorporate conventions as part of the language like Java, nor did it have a keyword for every possible interaction.

I used the implementation for classes from the Lua hump library. Under that paradigm, a class is a file that collects functions and data into a table. The local keyword can be used for the same purpose as 
“static” in Java because Lua has closures. Local functions and variables wouldn’t be global to the program when the file was required, but references to them would be remembered by objects of that class and be the same for all objects. Functions that didn’t need to be referenced outside of the scope of that file and data that did not conceptually belong to individual objects I left local/static.

 Before I became comfortable with the object-oriented system every other Love2d programmer seemed to be using (I’ll get to that in a minute), I wanted to make my Lua programs functional. People will sometimes refer to Lua as a functional language because functions in Lua are first-class. The problem was that, as small as Lua is, there exists insufficient support for functional programming within the language itself, so my choices were to adopt a functional library or build my own. In the end, about the only thing that came out of this brief drive to functionalize my game was table.forEach.

```
function table.forEach(array, fun)
  for _, i in ipairs(array) do
    fun(i)
  end
end
```

It does conceptually the same thing as map except it manipulates the data in the collection instead of building and returning a new collection. It is therefore imperative instead of functional. For background, let’s recall how assignment in Lua works.

```
g, h = 1
x = 2, 3
```

In the above code, 1 will be put into g and nothing will happen with h. Then 2 will be put into x and 3 will be ignored. The ipairs iterator works the same way. If you have for I in ipairs(array) then you will loop over the indices in the array, not over the elements as I would expect. I therefore found myself writing code where I forgot to put the dummy variable before the variable that I was really interested in. forEach didn’t save me from writing less code, it saved me from having to write ipairs.

Earlier I mentioned that I had embraced the object-oriented paradigm so common to game development. This is not necessarily something that I would recommend, but once I put my Smalltalk hat on, the complex web of objects became fun instead of frustrating. Objects communicate through “message-passing”, i.e. calling methods on each other. This is different from simply using getters and setters. The simplest setter allows an object to manipulate another’s data. By contrast, included in the concept of a message is that the sender communicates that an event has occurred, possibly passing along some data in the process, and the receiver can decide how to respond. In a game, this is what happens when a player collides with an enemy under certain circumstances:

```
      if other.isEnemy then
        other:rebuff()
      end
```

Enemy’s rebuff then looks like this.

```
function Enemy:rebuff()
  if self.level then
    if self.level < self.player.level then
      self:spawn()
    end
  end
end
```

The enemy is killed (spawn resets its health and moves it elsewhere, because we want to reuse objects) only if it’s level is less than the player’s. This method can be overridden (hump library allows this) if we want the enemy to perhaps shoot spikes or electrocute the player instead.
